docs/docs/reference/metaprogramming/toc.md, before:

---
layout: doc-page
title: "Overview"
---

The following pages introduce the redesign of metaprogramming in Scala. They
introduce the following fundamental facilities:

1. [Inline](./inline.html) `inline` is a new modifier that guarantees that
   a definition will be inlined at the point of use. The primary motivation
   behind inline is to reduce the overhead behind function calls and access to
   values. The expansion will be performed by the Scala compiler during the
   `Typer` compiler phase. Unlike Scala's existsing
   As opposed to inline in some other ecosystems,
   inlining is not merely a request to the compiler but for Scala it is a
   _command_. The reason is that inlining in Scala can drive other compile-time
   operations, like inline pattern matching (enabling type-level
   programming), macros (enabling compile-time, generative, metaprogramming) and
   runtime code generation (multi-stage programming).

2. [Macros](./macros.html) Macros are built on two well-known fundamental
   operations: quotation and splicing.  Quotation converts program code to
   data, specifically, a (tree-like) representation of this code. It is
   expressed as `'{...}` for expressions and as `'[...]` for types. Splicing,
   expressed as `${ ... }`, goes the other way: it converts a program's representation
   to program code. Together with `inline`, these two abstractions allow
   to construct program code programmatically.

3. [Staging](./staging.html) Where macros construct code at _compile-time_,
   staging lets programs construct new code at _runtime_. That way,
   code generation can depend not only on static data but also on data available at runtime. This splits the evaluation of the program in two or more phases or ...
   stages. Consequently, this method generative programming is called "Multi-Stage Programming". Staging is built on the same foundations as macros. It uses
   quotes and splices, but leaves out `inline`.

4. [TASTy Reflection](./tasty-reflect.html) Quotations are a "black-box"
   representation of code. They can be parameterized and composed using
   splices but their structure cannot be analyzed from the outside. Tasty
   reflection gives a way to analyze code structure by partly revealing the representation type of a piece of code in a standard API. The representation
   type is a form of typed abstract syntax tree, which gives rise to the "TASTy`
   moniker.

5. [TASTy Inspection](./tasty-inspect.html) Typed abstract syntax trees are serialized
   in a custom compressed binary format in `.tasty` files. TASTy inspection allows
   to load these files and analyze their content's tree structure.

Commit message:

Move erased terms in metaprogramming- update toc- add the erasedValue encoding as an alternative encoding for comparison- add an implicit match port of the state machine as a test case

docs/docs/reference/metaprogramming/toc.md, after:

---
layout: doc-page
title: "Overview"
---

The following pages introduce the redesign of metaprogramming in Scala. They
introduce the following fundamental facilities:

1. [Inline](./inline.html) `inline` is a new modifier that guarantees that
   a definition will be inlined at the point of use. The primary motivation
   behind inline is to reduce the overhead behind function calls and access to
   values. The expansion will be performed by the Scala compiler during the
   `Typer` compiler phase. Unlike Scala's existsing
   As opposed to inline in some other ecosystems,
   inlining is not merely a request to the compiler but for Scala it is a
   _command_. The reason is that inlining in Scala can drive other compile-time
   operations, like inline pattern matching (enabling type-level
   programming), macros (enabling compile-time, generative, metaprogramming) and
   runtime code generation (multi-stage programming).

2. [Macros](./macros.html) Macros are built on two well-known fundamental
   operations: quotation and splicing.  Quotation converts program code to
   data, specifically, a (tree-like) representation of this code. It is
   expressed as `'{...}` for expressions and as `'[...]` for types. Splicing,
   expressed as `${ ... }`, goes the other way: it converts a program's representation
   to program code. Together with `inline`, these two abstractions allow
   to construct program code programmatically.

3. [Staging](./staging.html) Where macros construct code at _compile-time_,
   staging lets programs construct new code at _runtime_. That way,
   code generation can depend not only on static data but also on data available at runtime. This splits the evaluation of the program in two or more phases or ...
   stages. Consequently, this method generative programming is called "Multi-Stage Programming". Staging is built on the same foundations as macros. It uses
   quotes and splices, but leaves out `inline`.

4. [Erased Terms](./erased-terms.html) Erased terms are used to enforce
   guarantees about program constraints. As `erased` terms are guaranteed not to
   be used in computations, they will not appear at the generated code.

5. [TASTy Reflection](./tasty-reflect.html) Quotations are a "black-box"
   representation of code. They can be parameterized and composed using
   splices but their structure cannot be analyzed from the outside. Tasty
   reflection gives a way to analyze code structure by partly revealing the representation type of a piece of code in a standard API. The representation
   type is a form of typed abstract syntax tree, which gives rise to the "TASTy`
   moniker.

6. [TASTy Inspection](./tasty-inspect.html) Typed abstract syntax trees are serialized
   in a custom compressed binary format in `.tasty` files. TASTy inspection allows
   to load these files and analyze their content's tree structure.
