README.md, before:

Dotty
=====
[![Build Status](http://dotty-ci.epfl.ch/api/badges/lampepfl/dotty/status.svg)](http://dotty-ci.epfl.ch/lampepfl/dotty)
[![Join the chat at https://gitter.im/lampepfl/dotty](https://badges.gitter.im/Join%20Chat.svg)](https://gitter.im/lampepfl/dotty?utm_source=badge&utm_medium=badge&utm_campaign=pr-badge&utm_content=badge)

* [Homepage](http://dotty.epfl.ch)
* [Documentation](http://dotty.epfl.ch/docs)

Try it out
==========
To try it in your project see also the [Getting Started User Guide](http://dotty.epfl.ch/#getting-started).

Code of Conduct
===============
Dotty uses the [Scala Code of Conduct](https://www.scala-lang.org/conduct.html)
for all communication and discussion. This includes both GitHub, Gitter chat and
other more direct lines of communication such as email.

How to Contribute
=================
* [Getting Started as Contributor](http://dotty.epfl.ch/docs/contributing/getting-started.html)
* [Awesome Error Messages](http://scala-lang.org/blog/2016/10/14/dotty-errors.html)
* [Issues](https://github.com/lampepfl/dotty/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22help+wanted%22)

License
=======
Dotty is licensed under the [3-Clause BSD License](https://github.com/lampepfl/dotty/blob/master/LICENSE.md)

Commit message:

Instructions on contributing knowledge added

README.md, after:

Dotty
=====
[![Build Status](http://dotty-ci.epfl.ch/api/badges/lampepfl/dotty/status.svg)](http://dotty-ci.epfl.ch/lampepfl/dotty)
[![Join the chat at https://gitter.im/lampepfl/dotty](https://badges.gitter.im/Join%20Chat.svg)](https://gitter.im/lampepfl/dotty?utm_source=badge&utm_medium=badge&utm_campaign=pr-badge&utm_content=badge)

* [Homepage](http://dotty.epfl.ch)
* [Documentation](http://dotty.epfl.ch/docs)

Try it out
==========
To try it in your project see also the [Getting Started User Guide](http://dotty.epfl.ch/#getting-started).

Code of Conduct
===============
Dotty uses the [Scala Code of Conduct](https://www.scala-lang.org/conduct.html)
for all communication and discussion. This includes both GitHub, Gitter chat and
other more direct lines of communication such as email.

How to Contribute
=================
* [Getting Started as Contributor](http://dotty.epfl.ch/docs/contributing/getting-started.html)
* [Awesome Error Messages](http://scala-lang.org/blog/2016/10/14/dotty-errors.html)
* [Issues](https://github.com/lampepfl/dotty/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22help+wanted%22)

## Contribute Internals-related Knowledge
If you know anything useful at all about Dotty, feel free to log this knowledge:

- [📜Log the Knowledge](https://github.com/lampepfl/dotty-knowledge/issues/new)
- [🎓More about Logging the Knowledge](https://github.com/lampepfl/dotty-knowledge/blob/master/README.md)

In short, no need to make it pretty, particularly human-readable or give it a particular structure. Just dump the knowledge you have and we'll take it from there.

License
=======
Dotty is licensed under the [3-Clause BSD License](https://github.com/lampepfl/dotty/blob/master/LICENSE.md)
