docs/_spec/APPLIEDreference/dropped-features/this-qualifier.md, before:

---
layout: doc-page
title: "Dropped: private[this] and protected[this]"
nightlyOf: https://docs.scala-lang.org/scala3/reference/dropped-features/this-qualifier.html
---

The `private[this]` and `protected[this]` access modifiers will be deprecated and phased out.

Previously, these modifiers were needed for

 - avoiding the generation of getters and setters
 - excluding code under a `private[this]` from variance checks. (Scala 2 also excludes `protected[this]` but this was found to be unsound and was therefore removed).
 - avoiding the generation of fields, if a `private[this] val` is not accessed
 by a class method.

The compiler now infers for `private` members the fact that they are only accessed via `this`. Such members are treated as if they had been declared `private[this]`. `protected[this]` is dropped without a replacement.

This change can in some cases change the semantics of a Scala program, since a
`private` val is no longer guaranteed to generate a field. The field
is omitted if

 - the `val` is only accessed via `this`, and
 - the `val` is not accessed from a method in the current class.

This can cause problems if a program tries to access the missing private field via reflection. The recommended fix is to declare the field instead to be qualified private with the enclosing class as qualifier. Example:
```scala
  class C(x: Int):
    private[C] val field = x + 1
      // [C] needed if `field` is to be accessed through reflection
    val retained = field * field
```

Commit message:

Update `private[this]` deprecation warning and documentation

docs/_spec/APPLIEDreference/dropped-features/this-qualifier.md, after:

---
layout: doc-page
title: "Dropped: private[this] and protected[this]"
nightlyOf: https://docs.scala-lang.org/scala3/reference/dropped-features/this-qualifier.html
---

The `private[this]` and `protected[this]` access modifiers will be deprecated and phased out. Migration warning will be shown in Scala 3.4+.

Previously, these modifiers were needed for

 - avoiding the generation of getters and setters
 - excluding code under a `private[this]` from variance checks. (Scala 2 also excludes `protected[this]` but this was found to be unsound and was therefore removed).
 - avoiding the generation of fields, if a `private[this] val` is not accessed
 by a class method.

The compiler now infers for `private` members the fact that they are only accessed via `this`. Such members are treated as if they had been declared `private[this]`. `protected[this]` is dropped without a replacement.

This change can in some cases change the semantics of a Scala program, since a
`private` val is no longer guaranteed to generate a field. The field
is omitted if

 - the `val` is only accessed via `this`, and
 - the `val` is not accessed from a method in the current class.

This can cause problems if a program tries to access the missing private field via reflection. The recommended fix is to declare the field instead to be qualified private with the enclosing class as qualifier. Example:
```scala
  class C(x: Int):
    private[C] val field = x + 1
      // [C] needed if `field` is to be accessed through reflection
    val retained = field * field
```
