docs/docs/reference/other-new-features/export.md, before:

---
layout: doc-page
title: "Export Clauses"
---

An export clause defines aliases for selected members of an object. Example:
```scala
  class BitMap
  class InkJet

  class Printer {
    type PrinterType
    def print(bits: BitMap): Unit = ???
    def status: List[String] = ???
  }

  class Scanner {
    def scan(): BitMap = ???
    def status: List[String] = ???
  }

  class Copier {
    private val printUnit = new Printer { type PrinterType = InkJet }
    private val scanUnit = new Scanner

    export scanUnit.scan
    export printUnit.{status => _, _}

    def status: List[String] = printUnit.status ++ scanUnit.status
  }
```
The two `export` clauses define the following _export aliases_ in class `Copier`:
```scala
  final def scan(): BitMap            = scanUnit.scan()
  final def print(bits: BitMap): Unit = printUnit.print(bits)
  final type PrinterType              = printUnit.PrinterType
```
They can be accessed inside `Copier` as well as from outside:
```scala
  val copier = new Copier
  copier.print(copier.scan())
```
An export clause has the same format as an import clause. Its general form is:
```scala
  export path . { sel_1, ..., sel_n }
  export delegate path . { sel_1, ..., sel_n }
```
It consists of a qualifier expression `path`, which must be a stable identifier, followed by
one or more selectors `sel_i` that identify what gets an alias. Selectors can be
of one of the following forms:

 - A _simple selector_ `x` creates aliases for all eligible members of `path` that are named `x`.
 - A _renaming selector_ `x => y` creates aliases for all eligible members of `path` that are named `x`, but the alias is named `y` instead of `x`.
 - An _omitting selector_ `x => _` prevents `x` from being aliased by a subsequent
   wildcard selector.
 - A _wildcard selector_ creates aliases for all eligible members of `path` except for
   those members that are named by a previous simple, renaming, or omitting selector.

A member is _eligible_ if all of the following holds:

 - its owner is not a base class of the class(*) containing the export clause,
 - it is accessible at the export clause,
 - it is not a constructor, nor the (synthetic) class part of an object,
 - it is delegate (or an old-style `implicit` value)
   if and only if the export is tagged with `delegate`.

It is a compile-time error if a simple or renaming selector does not identify any eligible
members.

Type members are aliased by type definitions, and term members are aliased by method definitions. Export aliases copy the type and value parameters of the members they refer to.
Export aliases are always `final`. Aliases of delegates are again defines as delegates (and aliases of old-style implicits are `implicit`). There are no other modifiers that can be given to an alias. This has the following consequences for overriding:

 - Export aliases cannot be overridden, since they are final.
 - Export aliases cannot override concrete members in base classes, since they are
   not marked `override`.
 - However, export aliases can implement deferred members of base classes.

Export aliases for value definitions are marked by the compiler as "stable". This means
that they can be used as parts of stable identifier paths, even though they are technically methods. For instance, the following is OK:
```scala
  class C { type T }
  object O { val c: C = ... }
  export O.c
  def f: c.T = ...
```

Export clauses can appear in classes or they can appear at the top-level. An export clause cannot appear as a statement in a block.

(*) Note: Unless otherwise stated, the term "class" in this discussion also includes object and trait definitions.

### Motivation

It is a standard recommendation to prefer composition over inheritance. This is really an application of the principle of least power: Composition treats components as blackboxes whereas inheritance can affect the internal workings of components through overriding. Sometimes the close coupling implied by inheritance is the best solution for a problem, but where this is not necessary the looser coupling of composition is better.

So far, object oriented languages including Scala made it much easer to use inheritance than composition. Inheritance only requires an `extends` clause whereas composition required a verbose elaboration of a sequence of forwarders. So in that sense, OO languages are pushing
programmers to a solution that is often too powerful. Export clauses redress the balance. They make composition relationships as concise and easy to express as inheritance relationships. Export clauses also offer more flexibility than extends clauses since members can be renamed or omitted.

Export clauses also fill a gap opened by the shift from package objects to toplevel definitions. One occasionally useful idiom that gets lost in this shift is a package object inheriting from some class. The idiom is often used in a facade like pattern, to make members
of internal compositions available to users of a package. Toplevel definitions are not wrapped in a user-defined object, so they can't inherit anything. However, toplevel definitions can be export clauses, which supports the facade design pattern in a safer and
more flexible way.

### Syntax changes:

```
TemplateStat   ::=  ...
                 |  Export
TopStat        ::=  ...
                 |  Export
Export         ::=  ‘export’ [‘delegate’] ImportExpr {‘,’ ImportExpr}
```

### Elaboration of Export Clauses

Export clauses raise questions about the order of elaboration during type checking.
Consider the following example:
```scala
  class B { val c: Int }
  object a { val b = new B }
  export a._
  export b._
}
```
Is the `export b._` clause legal? If yes, what does it export? Is it equivalent to `export a.b._`? What about if we swap the last two clauses?
```
  export b._
  export a._
```
To avoid tricky questions like these, we fix the elaboration order of exports as follows.

Export clauses are processed when the type information of the enclosing object or class is completed. Completion so far consisted of the following steps:

 1. Elaborate any annotations of the class.
 2. Elaborate the parameters of the class.
 3. Elaborate the self type of the class, if one is given.
 4. Enter all definitions of the class as class members, with types to be completed
    on demand.
 5. Determine the types of all parents of the class.

With export clauses, the following steps are added:

 6. Compute the types of all paths in export clauses in a context logically
    inside the class but not considering any imports or exports in that class.
 7. Enter export aliases for the eligible members of all paths in export clauses.

It is important that steps 6 and 7 are done in sequence: We first compute the types of _all_
paths in export clauses and only after this is done we enter any export aliases as class members. This means that a path of an export clause cannot refer to an alias made available
by another export clause of the same class.

Commit message:

Change rules for exports to make them more useful for enums
Two changes:

 - The forwarder alising a value definition gets a singleton type referring
   to the alias
 - Synthetic members are not exported by a wildcard export

This means we can now safely write
```
  enum MatchDegree {
    case NoMatch, ParamMatch, FullMatch
  }
  export MatchDegree._
```
and export just the three enum values with the most precise types. (precision
is necessary for exhaustiveness checks, among others).

docs/docs/reference/other-new-features/export.md, after:

---
layout: doc-page
title: "Export Clauses"
---

An export clause defines aliases for selected members of an object. Example:
```scala
  class BitMap
  class InkJet

  class Printer {
    type PrinterType
    def print(bits: BitMap): Unit = ???
    def status: List[String] = ???
  }

  class Scanner {
    def scan(): BitMap = ???
    def status: List[String] = ???
  }

  class Copier {
    private val printUnit = new Printer { type PrinterType = InkJet }
    private val scanUnit = new Scanner

    export scanUnit.scan
    export printUnit.{status => _, _}

    def status: List[String] = printUnit.status ++ scanUnit.status
  }
```
The two `export` clauses define the following _export aliases_ in class `Copier`:
```scala
  final def scan(): BitMap            = scanUnit.scan()
  final def print(bits: BitMap): Unit = printUnit.print(bits)
  final type PrinterType              = printUnit.PrinterType
```
They can be accessed inside `Copier` as well as from outside:
```scala
  val copier = new Copier
  copier.print(copier.scan())
```
An export clause has the same format as an import clause. Its general form is:
```scala
  export path . { sel_1, ..., sel_n }
  export delegate path . { sel_1, ..., sel_n }
```
It consists of a qualifier expression `path`, which must be a stable identifier, followed by
one or more selectors `sel_i` that identify what gets an alias. Selectors can be
of one of the following forms:

 - A _simple selector_ `x` creates aliases for all eligible members of `path` that are named `x`.
 - A _renaming selector_ `x => y` creates aliases for all eligible members of `path` that are named `x`, but the alias is named `y` instead of `x`.
 - An _omitting selector_ `x => _` prevents `x` from being aliased by a subsequent
   wildcard selector.
 - A _wildcard selector_ creates aliases for all eligible members of `path` except for
   synthetic members generated by the compiler and those members that are named by a previous simple, renaming, or omitting selector.

A member is _eligible_ if all of the following holds:

 - its owner is not a base class of the class(*) containing the export clause,
 - it is accessible at the export clause,
 - it is not a constructor, nor the (synthetic) class part of an object,
 - it is delegate (or an old-style `implicit` value)
   if and only if the export is tagged with `delegate`.

It is a compile-time error if a simple or renaming selector does not identify any eligible
members.

Type members are aliased by type definitions, and term members are aliased by method definitions. Export aliases copy the type and value parameters of the members they refer to.
Export aliases are always `final`. Aliases of delegates are again defines as delegates (and aliases of old-style implicits are `implicit`). There are no other modifiers that can be given to an alias. This has the following consequences for overriding:

 - Export aliases cannot be overridden, since they are final.
 - Export aliases cannot override concrete members in base classes, since they are
   not marked `override`.
 - However, export aliases can implement deferred members of base classes.

Export aliases for value definitions are marked by the compiler as "stable" and their result types are the singleton types of the aliased definitions. This means
that they can be used as parts of stable identifier paths, even though they are technically methods. For instance, the following is OK:
```scala
  class C { type T }
  object O { val c: C = ... }
  export O.c
  def f: c.T = ...
```

Export clauses can appear in classes or they can appear at the top-level. An export clause cannot appear as a statement in a block.

(*) Note: Unless otherwise stated, the term "class" in this discussion also includes object and trait definitions.

### Motivation

It is a standard recommendation to prefer composition over inheritance. This is really an application of the principle of least power: Composition treats components as blackboxes whereas inheritance can affect the internal workings of components through overriding. Sometimes the close coupling implied by inheritance is the best solution for a problem, but where this is not necessary the looser coupling of composition is better.

So far, object oriented languages including Scala made it much easer to use inheritance than composition. Inheritance only requires an `extends` clause whereas composition required a verbose elaboration of a sequence of forwarders. So in that sense, OO languages are pushing
programmers to a solution that is often too powerful. Export clauses redress the balance. They make composition relationships as concise and easy to express as inheritance relationships. Export clauses also offer more flexibility than extends clauses since members can be renamed or omitted.

Export clauses also fill a gap opened by the shift from package objects to toplevel definitions. One occasionally useful idiom that gets lost in this shift is a package object inheriting from some class. The idiom is often used in a facade like pattern, to make members
of internal compositions available to users of a package. Toplevel definitions are not wrapped in a user-defined object, so they can't inherit anything. However, toplevel definitions can be export clauses, which supports the facade design pattern in a safer and
more flexible way.

### Syntax changes:

```
TemplateStat   ::=  ...
                 |  Export
TopStat        ::=  ...
                 |  Export
Export         ::=  ‘export’ [‘delegate’] ImportExpr {‘,’ ImportExpr}
```

### Elaboration of Export Clauses

Export clauses raise questions about the order of elaboration during type checking.
Consider the following example:
```scala
  class B { val c: Int }
  object a { val b = new B }
  export a._
  export b._
}
```
Is the `export b._` clause legal? If yes, what does it export? Is it equivalent to `export a.b._`? What about if we swap the last two clauses?
```
  export b._
  export a._
```
To avoid tricky questions like these, we fix the elaboration order of exports as follows.

Export clauses are processed when the type information of the enclosing object or class is completed. Completion so far consisted of the following steps:

 1. Elaborate any annotations of the class.
 2. Elaborate the parameters of the class.
 3. Elaborate the self type of the class, if one is given.
 4. Enter all definitions of the class as class members, with types to be completed
    on demand.
 5. Determine the types of all parents of the class.

With export clauses, the following steps are added:

 6. Compute the types of all paths in export clauses in a context logically
    inside the class but not considering any imports or exports in that class.
 7. Enter export aliases for the eligible members of all paths in export clauses.

It is important that steps 6 and 7 are done in sequence: We first compute the types of _all_
paths in export clauses and only after this is done we enter any export aliases as class members. This means that a path of an export clause cannot refer to an alias made available
by another export clause of the same class.
