docs/docs/reference/contextual/conversions.md, before:

---
layout: doc-page
title: "Implicit Conversions"
---

Implicit conversions are defined by delegates for the `scala.Conversion` class.
This class is defined in package `scala` as follows:
```scala
abstract class Conversion[-T, +U] extends (T => U)
```
For example, here is an implicit conversion from `String` to `Token`:
```scala
delegate for Conversion[String, Token] {
  def apply(str: String): Token = new KeyWord(str)
}
```
Using an alias delegate this can be expressed more concisely as:
```scala
delegate for Conversion[String, Token] = new KeyWord(_)
```
An implicit conversion is applied automatically by the compiler in three situations:

1. If an expression `e` has type `T`, and `T` does not conform to the expression's expected type `S`.
2. In a selection `e.m` with `e` of type `T`, but `T` defines no member `m`.
3. In an application `e.m(args)` with `e` of type `T`, if `T` does define
   some member(s) named `m`, but none of these members can be applied to the arguments `args`.

In the first case, the compiler looks for a delegate for
`scala.Conversion` that maps an argument of type `T` to type `S`. In the second and third
case, it looks for a delegate for `scala.Conversion` that maps an argument of type `T`
to a type that defines a member `m` which can be applied to `args` if present.
If such a delegate `C` is found, the expression `e` is replaced by `C.apply(e)`.

## Examples

1. The `Predef` package contains "auto-boxing" conversions that map
primitive number types to subclasses of `java.lang.Number`. For instance, the
conversion from `Int` to `java.lang.Integer` can be defined as follows:
```scala
delegate int2Integer for Conversion[Int, java.lang.Integer] =
 java.lang.Integer.valueOf(_)
```

2. The "magnet" pattern is sometimes used to express many variants of a method. Instead of defining overloaded versions of the method, one can also let the method take one or more arguments of specially defined "magnet" types, into which various argument types can be converted. E.g.
```scala
object Completions {

  // The argument "magnet" type
  enum CompletionArg {
    case Error(s: String)
    case Response(f: Future[HttpResponse])
    case Status(code: Future[StatusCode])
  }
  object CompletionArg {

    // conversions defining the possible arguments to pass to `complete`
    // these always come with CompletionArg
    // They can be invoked explicitly, e.g.
    //
    //   CompletionArg.fromStatusCode(statusCode)

    delegate fromString     for Conversion[String, CompletionArg]               = Error(_)
    delegate fromFuture     for Conversion[Future[HttpResponse], CompletionArg] = Response(_)
    delegate fromStatusCode for Conversion[Future[StatusCode], CompletionArg]   = Status(_)
  }
  import CompletionArg._

  def complete[T](arg: CompletionArg) = arg match {
    case Error(s) => ...
    case Response(f) => ...
    case Status(code) => ...
  }
}
```
This setup is more complicated than simple overloading of `complete`, but it can still be useful if normal overloading is not available (as in the case above, since we cannot have two overloaded methods that take `Future[...]` arguments), or if normal overloading would lead to a combinatorial explosion of variants.

Commit message:

syntax change: delegate for -> given as

docs/docs/reference/contextual/conversions.md, after:

---
layout: doc-page
title: "Implicit Conversions"
---

Implicit conversions are defined by given instances of the `scala.Conversion` class.
This class is defined in package `scala` as follows:
```scala
abstract class Conversion[-T, +U] extends (T => U)
```
For example, here is an implicit conversion from `String` to `Token`:
```scala
given as Conversion[String, Token] {
  def apply(str: String): Token = new KeyWord(str)
}
```
Using an alias this can be expressed more concisely as:
```scala
given as Conversion[String, Token] = new KeyWord(_)
```
An implicit conversion is applied automatically by the compiler in three situations:

1. If an expression `e` has type `T`, and `T` does not conform to the expression's expected type `S`.
2. In a selection `e.m` with `e` of type `T`, but `T` defines no member `m`.
3. In an application `e.m(args)` with `e` of type `T`, if `T` does define
   some member(s) named `m`, but none of these members can be applied to the arguments `args`.

In the first case, the compiler looks for a given `scala.Conversion` that maps
an argument of type `T` to type `S`. In the second and third
case, it looks for a given `scala.Conversion` that maps an argument of type `T`
to a type that defines a member `m` which can be applied to `args` if present.
If such an instance `C` is given, the expression `e` is replaced by `C.apply(e)`.

## Examples

1. The `Predef` package contains "auto-boxing" conversions that map
primitive number types to subclasses of `java.lang.Number`. For instance, the
conversion from `Int` to `java.lang.Integer` can be defined as follows:
```scala
given int2Integer as Conversion[Int, java.lang.Integer] =
 java.lang.Integer.valueOf(_)
```

2. The "magnet" pattern is sometimes used to express many variants of a method. Instead of defining overloaded versions of the method, one can also let the method take one or more arguments of specially defined "magnet" types, into which various argument types can be converted. E.g.
```scala
object Completions {

  // The argument "magnet" type
  enum CompletionArg {
    case Error(s: String)
    case Response(f: Future[HttpResponse])
    case Status(code: Future[StatusCode])
  }
  object CompletionArg {

    // conversions defining the possible arguments to pass to `complete`
    // these always come with CompletionArg
    // They can be invoked explicitly, e.g.
    //
    //   CompletionArg.fromStatusCode(statusCode)

    given fromString     as Conversion[String, CompletionArg]               = Error(_)
    given fromFuture     as Conversion[Future[HttpResponse], CompletionArg] = Response(_)
    given fromStatusCode as Conversion[Future[StatusCode], CompletionArg]   = Status(_)
  }
  import CompletionArg._

  def complete[T](arg: CompletionArg) = arg match {
    case Error(s) => ...
    case Response(f) => ...
    case Status(code) => ...
  }
}
```
This setup is more complicated than simple overloading of `complete`, but it can still be useful if normal overloading is not available (as in the case above, since we cannot have two overloaded methods that take `Future[...]` arguments), or if normal overloading would lead to a combinatorial explosion of variants.
